docs(operators): restructure operators guide (#97)
openmcp-project/docs: docs/operators/00-quickstart.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
id: quickstart
---

# Quickstart

> Get OpenControlPlane running on your local machine in under 10 minutes. By the end, you'll have a platform that hands out managed `ControlPlanes` with Flux to your teams.

Reviewer: Maybe we should rephrase that a bit into something like "...hands out managed `ControlPlanes` with the capability to request Flux". Currently it imo sounds like Flux will come preinstalled

Author: Good one 👍 Fixed with [`2231d5d` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/commits/2231d5dea6ee8aebbc490810c5684adceea67d72)

:::note
[`ocpctl`](https://github.com/openmcp-project/ocpctl) is the CLI for managing OpenControlPlane environments locally and in production. It is under active development — some commands and flags may change.
:::

## What You'll Build

```mermaid
flowchart LR

>     A["<b>Platform Cluster</b><br/>runs the operator + providers"] -->|manages| B["<b>Onboarding Cluster</b><br/>teams request ControlPlanes here"]

Reviewer 2: nit: see my comment regarding "the operator" below.

Author: Fixed with [`88cb094` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/commits/88cb094b7ac896ea4b527f2e967401a08e083234)

    B -->|provisions| C["<b>ControlPlane Cluster</b><br/>your isolated ControlPlane"]
```

OpenControlPlane creates three clusters that work together:

| Cluster | Who uses it | Purpose |
|---------|-------------|---------|

> | 🟢 **Platform** | Platform operators | Runs the operator, cluster providers, and service providers |

Reviewer 2: nit: "the operator" is a little confusing as the previous part doesn't introduce a specific operator. Imo it would be most fitting to use "platform services" instead. At this point a reader doesn't care what the openmcp-operator is and it is kind of counter intuitive to not mention platform services here but the other two provider kinds.

Author: Thank you! Fixed with [`88cb094` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/commits/88cb094b7ac896ea4b527f2e967401a08e083234)

| 🔵 **Onboarding** | End users (teams) | API surface where teams create `ControlPlanes` |
| 🟣 **ControlPlane** | End users (teams) | One per team, isolated workspace with requested services |

The separation ensures end users never touch infrastructure. They interact only with the Onboarding cluster to request resources, and their services appear on their own `ControlPlane` cluster.

---

## Prerequisites

- Docker running (8 GB RAM allocated to it)

> - `kubectl` CLI installed

Reviewer 3: Depending on how deep in the stack you want to start, `go` would also be a prerequisite.

Author: Good catch! Fixed with [`ddd33e5` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/commits/ddd33e5e3d4ed6dc3d0f47abf33bf7905a8dec07)

- `kind` CLI installed

> - `flux` CLI installed

Reviewer: Do we maybe want to include links to the respective installation guides in case the user does have something not installed?

Author: Good catch! Fixed with [`988fed1` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/commits/988fed1014f12edcba727dfe25c1082e5ca1f690)

- ~10 minutes

## Install ocpctl

```shell
go install github.com/openmcp-project/ocpctl@v0.1.0-alpha.1
```

Or download a pre-built binary from the [releases page](https://github.com/openmcp-project/ocpctl/releases/latest).

---

## Step 1: Start the platform

```shell
ocpctl env apply local
```

This takes a few minutes. It creates a local Kind-based environment with the full OpenControlPlane stack: `openmcp-operator`, `cluster-provider-kind`, plus an onboarding cluster.

Verify the platform is running:

```shell
kubectl config use-context kind-local-platform
```

### Install service-provider-flux

:::apply-to-platform

```shell
flux install
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: openmcp.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: ServiceProvider
metadata:
  name: flux
  namespace: openmcp-system
spec:
  image: ghcr.io/openmcp-project/images/service-provider-flux:v0.2.0
EOF
```

:::

### Configure allowed Flux versions

> Once `sp-flux` is running, apply a `ProviderConfig` to define which Flux versions end users may install:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once `ServiceProvider` Flux is running, apply a `ProviderConfig` to define which Flux versions end users may install:
```

Author: Fixed with [`59fbc63` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/changes/59fbc6334ebe7cc9db39f12d6e1cd8f5ceb9e028)

First, export the onboarding cluster's kubeconfig so `kubectl` can reach it:

```shell
kind export kubeconfig --name local-onboarding
```

See the [`ManagedControlPlaneV2` reference](/reference/core/managedcontrolplane) for the full API.

:::apply-to-onboarding-api

```shell
kubectl config use-context kind-local-onboarding
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: core.openmcp.cloud/v2alpha1
kind: ManagedControlPlaneV2
metadata:
  name: my-controlplane
  namespace: default
spec:
  iam: {}
EOF
```

:::

Wait for it to become ready:

```shell
kubectl get managedcontrolplanev2 my-controlplane -w
```

Once provisioning completes, you will see:

```
NAME              PHASE
my-controlplane   Ready
```

The platform has provisioned an isolated `ControlPlane` cluster.

---

## Step 3: Request Flux as a service

The team wants Flux installed on their `ControlPlane`:

:::apply-to-onboarding-api

```shell
kubectl config use-context kind-local-onboarding
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: flux.services.openmcp.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Flux
metadata:
  name: my-controlplane
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: 2.8.3
EOF
```

:::

> The `service-provider-flux` on the platform cluster detects this request and installs Flux into the `ControlPlane` cluster automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ServiceProvider` Flux on the platform cluster detects this request and installs Flux into the `ControlPlane` cluster automatically.
```

Author: Fixed with [`4e635b6` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/commits/4e635b68ba11257ad690628c3c31d13eec68d331)

mcp-ad2klitc.f52190f9     <- copy name of ControlPlane
```

And export the kubeconfig to your current kube context:

```shell
kind export kubeconfig --name <name of ControlPlane>
```

:::apply-to-controlplane

```shell
kubectl get pods -n flux-system
```

You should see Flux controllers running:

```
NAME                                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
helm-controller-8564d95f86-6kxlg               1/1     Running   0          2m8s
image-automation-controller-5c484478c6-jj29p   1/1     Running   0          2m8s
image-reflector-controller-5875745f59-b9cp4    1/1     Running   0          2m8s
kustomize-controller-7587bc49f9-m47nv          1/1     Running   0          2m8s
notification-controller-d7d89cdb9-sht7p        1/1     Running   0          2m8s
source-controller-7f6f4dd77d-vmxvv             1/1     Running   0          2m8s
```

:::

The team now has a fully functional control plane with Flux, provisioned through a simple API request.

---

## Clean up

```shell
ocpctl env delete local
```

Removes all Kind clusters and resources created by `ocpctl env apply local`.

---

## Next Steps

Your platform is running. Here's what to explore next:

> - **Add more services** — beyond Flux, you can offer [Crossplane](https://www.crossplane.io/), [External Secrets Operator](https://external-secrets.io/), [Velero](https://velero.io/), and more to your teams. Each service is a ServiceProvider deployed on the platform cluster.

Reviewer 3: Do we already have a guide on this? If so, it would be great to link it here. If not, that's fine for now.
Is it this one? https://openmcp-project.github.io/docs/developers/serviceprovider/deploy

Author: You are totally right 💯 Fixed with [`e39a481` (this PR)](https://github.com/openmcp-project/docs/pull/97/changes/e39a481a9c3583a98013d6344e82acfc925bfc77)
